'\" t
.\"
.TH "VIUA-ASM" "1" "2022-03-24" "Viua VM 0.11.1" "Viua VM Manual"
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * MAIN CONTENT STARTS HERE *
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "NAME"
viua-asm \- convert Viua assembly source code to ELF binaries
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SY "viua asm"
.OP \-o <output>
.OP \-c
.OP \-\-
.IR <source> \&.\|.\|.\&
.YS
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.sp
\fBviua-asm\fR is a tool that converts Viua assembly source code into ELF binary
files to be consumed by the virtual machine's kernel.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.SS General options
.PP
.B \-c
.RS 4
Output a linkable module. The default is to output an executable.
.RE
.PP
.B \-o
.I output
.RS 4
Write produced ELF binary into \fIoutput\fR file, instead of the default a.out
file.
.RE
.SS Help and information
.PP
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
.RS 4
Show verbose output, where applicable.
.RE
.PP
.B \-\-version
.RS 4
Show version information.
.RE
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
\fB0\fR
Successful program execution.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Syntax, semantic, type, or other error in input source code.
.SH "FILES"
.PP
\fIsource\fR
.RS 4
The assembler opens its input files read-only. They must contain valid Viua VM
assembly source code.
.RE
.PP
\fIoutput\fR
.RS 4
The assembler outputs ELF binaries. They can be inspected using the usual
.BR readelf (1)
program, or the Viua-flavoured variant
.BR viua\-readelf (1).
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.sp
.BR viua\-dis (1),
.BR viua\-readelf (1),
.BR viua\-repl (1),
.BR viua\-vm (1),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR elf (5)
.SH "VIUA VM"
.sp
Part of the \fBviua\fR(1) toolchain
