'\" t
.\"
.TH "VIUA-VM" "1" "2022-03-24" "Viua VM 0.11.1" "Viua VM Manual"
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * MAIN CONTENT STARTS HERE *
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "NAME"
viua-vm \- run ELF executables with Viua bytecode
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SY "viua vm"
.OP \-\-
.I <executable>
.RI [ <args>
\&.\|.\|.\&]
.SY "viua vm"
.OP \-\-verbose
.B \-\-version
.YS
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.sp
.B viua-vm
is the kernel of Viua virtual machine, responsible for executing bytecode
programs.
.PP
If any
.I <args>
are passed on the command line they are forwarded to the main function defined
by the
.I <executable>
module.
.PP
Standard input stream is not used by the kernel, the program executed has
direct, uninterrupted, and unfiltered access to the file descriptor. The same is
true for standard output stream - the kernel never uses it. The virtual machine
may interfere with the output on the standard error stream. By default, the
standard error stream is where the trace output from the kernel goes. It can be
redirected to a different stream using the
.B VIUA_VM_TRACE_FD
environment variable.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.SS Help and information
.PP
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
.RS 4
Show verbose output, where applicable.
.RE
.PP
.B \-\-version
.RS 4
Show version information.
.RE
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Successful program execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error in one of the user code modules.
.TP
.B 127
Error in virtual machine's code.
.SH "FILES"
.PP
.I <executable>
.RS 4
The main module loaded by the kernel. The module must be an executable ELF file
containing Viua bytecode. It must contain a main function.
.RE
.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.PP
.TP
.BR VIUA_VM_TRACE_FD = \fI<fd>\fR
Redirect trace output ie, log stream of executed instructions and
.B ip
values, as well as output of
.B ebreak
instructions to file descriptor
.IR <fd> .
If this environment variable is not defined trace output is written to standard
error stream.
.TP
.BR VIUA_VM_PID_SEED = \fI<seed>\fR
Set PID seed to
.IR <seed> .
The seed must be a valid IPv6 address. The highest 64 bits identify a virtual
machine instance, and lower 64 bits are used as a counter. By default, the seed
is
.B [fe80::]
with random lower 64 bits.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.sp
.BR viua\-asm (1),
.BR viua\-dis (1),
.BR viua\-readelf (1),
.BR viua\-repl (1),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR elf (5)
.SH "VIUA VM"
.sp
Part of the \fBviua\fR(1) toolchain
