'\" t
.\"
.TH "VIUA" "1" "2022-05-17" "Viua VM 0.11.1" "Viua VM Manual"
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * MAIN CONTENT STARTS HERE *
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.nh
.SH "NAME"
viua \- a bytecode virtual machine for highly concurrent software
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SY "viua"
.BR asm | dis | vm | readelf | repl
.RI [ file ]
.SY "viua asm"
.OP \-o outfile
.IR infile ...
.sp
.SY "viua help"
.RI [ tool ]
.SY "viua"
.B \-\-help
.sp
.SY "viua"
.B \-\-version
.YS
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B Viua
is a bytecode virtual machine designed to effectively run highly concurrent
software. The high-level execution model exposed to user code is based on the
Actor model.
See
.BR viua-isa (7)
for description of thevirtual machine's instruction set and architecture.
.sp
The
.BR viua (1)
driver program is the entry point to the toolchain provided by the VM.
.SH "TOOLCHAIN"
The default Viua distribution comes with a few core tools.
.TP
.B viua
The entry point into the toolchain.
.TP
.B asm
The assembler turns source code written in Viua assembly language into ELF
files to be run by the VM.
.TP
.B dis
The disassembler turns ELF files with Viua bytecode into assembly source code.
The recreated source will be functionally equivallent to the original source
code used to build the ELF, but may look a little bit different.
.TP
.B vm
The virtual machine's kernel executes the ELF files produced by the assembler.
It is the core of the VM.
.TP
.B readelf
ELF file analyser customised for ELFs produced by Viua.
.TP
.B repl
The interactive evaluator and debugger.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR viua\-asm (1),
.BR viua\-dis (1),
.BR viua\-readelf (1),
.BR viua\-repl (1),
.BR viua\-vm (1),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR elf (5)
.SH "VIUA VM"
Part of the \fBviua\fR(1) toolchain
.SH NOTES
.TP
Web site
.UR https://viuavm.org
.UE
.TP
Source code repository
.UR https://git.sr.ht/~maelkum/viuavm
.UE
