'\" t
.\"
.TH "VIUA-LD" "1" "2023-08-24" "Viua VM 0.12.1" "Viua VM Manual"
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * MAIN CONTENT STARTS HERE *
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "NAME"
viua-ld \- Viua VM linker
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SY "viua asm"
.OP \-o output
.OP \-\-type=\fItype\fR
.OP \-\-
.IR input \&.\|.\|.\&
.YS
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.sp
\fBviua-ld\fR is a tool that converts relocatable ELF files into executables or
libraries to be consumed by the virtual machine's kernel.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.SS General options
.TP
.BR \-o " " \fIoutput\fR
Write produced ELF binary into \fIoutput\fR file, instead of the default a.out
file.
.TP
.BR \-\-type = exec | object | shared
Emit ELF of the desired type.
See
.B "OUTPUT TYPES"
for more information.
.SS Help and information
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show verbose output, where applicable.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version information.
.SH "OUTPUT TYPES"
.TP
.B exec
Executable file that can be run by the virtual machine's kernel.
.TP
.B object
Relocatable file.
.TP
.B shared
Shared library that can be dynamically linked into running executables.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Successful program execution.
.TP
.B 1
Invalid input.
.SH "FILES"
.TP
.I input
The linker opens its input files read-only. They must contain valid Viua VM
relocatable files.
.TP
.I output
The assembler outputs ELF binaries. They can be inspected using the usual
.BR readelf (1)
program.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR viua\-asm (1),
.BR viua\-dis (1),
.BR viua\-repl (1),
.BR viua\-vm (1),
.BR viua\-asm\-lang (7),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR elf (5)
.SH "VIUA VM"
Part of the \fBviua\fR(1) toolchain
.SH NOTES
.TP
Web site
.UR https://viuavm.org
.UE
.TP
Source code repository
.UR https://git.sr.ht/~maelkum/viuavm
.UE
