.TH VIUA-ASM "1" "$Date$"

.\" To view this file while editing, run it through groff:
.\"   groff -Tascii -man viua-asm.man | less

.SH NAME
viua-asm \- assembler for Viua virtual machine
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B viua-asm
[
.B \-V | \-\-version
]
[
.B \-h | \-\-help
]

.B viua-asm
[
.B \-v | \-\-verbose
]
[
.B \-d | \-\-debug
]
[
.B \-\-scream
]
.br
         [
.B \-W | \-\-Wall
]
[
.B \-\-Wmissing-end
]
.br
         [
.B \-\-Eall
]
[
.B \-\-Emissing-end
]
[
.B \-\-Ehalt-is-last
]
.br
         [
.B \-c | \-\-lib
]
[
.B \-E | \-\-expand
]
[
.B \-C | \-\-verify
]
.br
         [
.B \-o
.I <outfile>
]
.I <infile>
[
.I <link>...
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Viua is a register based virtual machine programmable in a custom assembly-lookalike programming language.
It provides strong memory safety, predicatble object lifetimes and supports massively parallel programs
with hundreds of thousands of VM threads running at a time.
.PP
Apart from running code written in its native language, Viua is also capable of importing extension libraries
written in C++.

.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Show version information.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Show verbose output.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-debug
Show debugging output.
.TP
.B \-\-scream
Show even more debugging output.
.TP
.B \-W, \-\-Wall
Report all warnings detected by the assembler.
.TP
.B \-\-Wmissing-end
Warn about missing
.B end
instruction at the end of function definition.
.TP
.B \-\-Eall
Turn all warnings into errors.
.TP
.B \-\-Emissing-end
Abort compilation when
.B end
instruction is missing at the end of function definition.
.TP
.B \-\-Ehalt-is-last
Abort compilation when
.B halt
instruction is used as ending instruction.
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-lib
Compile a library (linkable binary file).
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-expand
Only expand the source instead of compiling it.
This translates initial input which may be in nested asm
form into a one-instruction-per-line form.
.TP
.B \-C, \-\-verify
Only verify source code correctness instead of compiling.
This turns the assembler into a sort of static code analyzer.
.TP
.BI "\-o " outfile
Use 
.I outfile
as the output path instead of
.I a.out
which is the default name of the output file.

.SH FILES AND DIRECTORIES
Viua assembler does not use any special directories or files.
The only "special" file it uses is
.IB a.out
- the default output path for compiled binaries.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
Viua assembler does not recognize any special environment variables.
